Blog post about cgroup v1 support moving to maintenance mode / KEP-4569 (#47069)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-08-15-moving-cgroup-v1-support-maintenance-mode-kubernetes-1-31.md

Author: Updated, thanks.

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.31: Moving cgroup v1 Support into Maintenance Mode"

> date: 2024-08-15

Reviewer: Is this publication date correct? Also, do we want to specify a _time_?

I would, to ensure this is ordered after the release announcement article (which also needs a specific publication time set).

It's OK to merge and publish the article slightly after the publication time, so long as it's not many hours later (< 20 hours later feels OK).

Author: @@rashansmith what do you think about the publishing date?

xref: kubernetes/enhancements#4569 (comment)

Reviewer 2: @harche your publication date from our blog project board is set on the 14th of August, which would be 24 hours after the release I think you should adjust according to that.

@rashansmith correct me if I'm wrong here!

@sftim what happens if you don't specify a time? Does it go off at midnight 0:00 UTC?

Reviewer: No time specified? The article comes out at midnight in the default timezone.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be ok to publish potentially in the 24-hour span after the release, wdyt? @sftim

Reviewer: > I think it would be ok to publish potentially in the 24-hour span after the release, wdyt? @sftim

No objection from me (as a blog team editor). Release comms are the group that get to decide on scheduling here.

Author: Thanks @mbianchidev and @sftim, I updated the date to `2024-08-14`

> title: "Kubernetes 1.31: Moving cgroup v1 Support into Maintenance Mode in Kubernetes 1.31"

Reviewer 3: `Kubernetes 1.31` dup?

slug: kubernetes-1-31-moving-cgroup-v1-support-maintenance-mode
author: Harshal Patil
---

As Kubernetes continues to evolve and adapt to the changing landscape of
container orchestration, the community has decided to move cgroup v1 support
into [maintenance mode](#what-does-maintenance-mode-mean) in v1.31.

> This shift aligns with the broader industry's move towards cgroup v2, offering

Reviewer 2: I would go for a couple of clarity changes:

"offering improved functionalities: including scalability and a more consistent interface." - imho easier to read

"Before we dive into the consequences for Kubernetes, let's take a step back to understand what cgroups are and their significance in Linux." - avoids Kubernetes repetition and beginning a sentence with"but"

Reviewer 2: Solved!

improved functionality, scalability, and a more consistent interface. But before
we dive into the consequences for Kubernetes, let's take a step back and
understand what cgroups and their significance in Linux and Kubernetes are.

## Understanding cgroups

[Control groups](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/cgroups.7.html), or
cgroups, are a Linux kernel feature that allows the allocation, prioritization,
denial, and management of system resources (such as CPU, memory, disk I/O,
and network bandwidth) among processes. This functionality is crucial for
maintaining system performance and ensuring that no single process can
monopolize system resources, which is especially important in multi-tenant
environments.

There are two versions of cgroups:
[v1](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/index.html) and
[v2](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html). While cgroup v1
provided sufficient capabilities for resource management, it had limitations
that led to the development of cgroup v2. Cgroup v2 offers a more unified

> and consistent interface and better resource control features.

Reviewer 2: I would go for 

"Cgroup v2 offers a more unified and consistent interface, on top of better resource control features." - avoids "and" repetition

> ## Cgroups in Kubernetes, a leading container orchestration

Author: Updated, thanks.

> Kubernetes relies heavily on cgroups to manage and isolate the resources consumed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Linux nodes, Kubernetes relies heavily on cgroups to manage and isolate the resources consumed
```

resources consumed by containers running in pods. Each container in Kubernetes
is placed in its own cgroup, which allows Kubernetes to enforce resource limits,
monitor usage, and ensure fair resource distribution among all containers.

> ### How Kubernetes Uses cgroups:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How Kubernetes uses cgroups
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

> * **Resource Allocation**
> : Ensures that containers do not exceed their allocated CPU and memory limits.
> 
> * **Isolation**
> : Isolates containers from each other to prevent resource contention.
> 
> * **Monitoring**
> : Tracks resource usage for each container to provide insights and metrics.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Resource Allocation**
: Ensures that containers do not exceed their allocated CPU and memory limits.

**Isolation**
: Isolates containers from each other to prevent resource contention.

**Monitoring**
: Tracks resource usage for each container to provide insights and metrics.
```

## Transitioning to Cgroup v2

The Linux community has been focusing on cgroup v2 for new features and
improvements. Major Linux distributions and projects like
[systemd](https://github.com/systemd/systemd/issues/30852) are
transitioning towards cgroup v2, which provides several benefits over cgroup
v1, such as Unified Hierarchy, Improved Interface, Better Resource Control,
[cgroup aware OOM killer](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/117793),
[rootless support](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/2033-kubelet-in-userns-aka-rootless/README.md#cgroup) etc.

Given these advantages, Kubernetes is also making the move to embrace cgroup
v2 more fully. However, this transition needs to be handled carefully to avoid
disrupting existing workloads and to provide a smooth migration path for users.

> ## Moving cgroup v1 Support into Maintenance Mode
> 
> ### What Does Maintenance Mode Mean?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Moving cgroup v1 support into maintenance mode

### What does maintenance mode mean?
```

When cgroup v1 is placed into maintenance mode in Kubernetes, it means that:

1. **Feature Freeze**: No new features will be added to cgroup v1 support.
2. **Security Fixes**: Critical security fixes will still be provided.
3. **Best-Effort Bug Fixes**: Major bugs may be fixed if feasible, but some
issues might remain unresolved.

> ### Why Move to Maintenance Mode?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why move to maintenance mode?
```

The move to maintenance mode is driven by the need to stay in line with the
broader ecosystem and to encourage the adoption of cgroup v2, which offers
better performance, security, and usability. By transitioning cgroup v1 to
maintenance mode, Kubernetes can focus on enhancing support for cgroup v2
and ensure it meets the needs of modern workloads. It's important to note
that maintenance mode does not mean deprecation; cgroup v1 will continue to
receive critical security fixes and major bug fixes as needed.

> ## Impact on Users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What this means for cluster administrators
```

Users currently relying on cgroup v1 are highly encouraged to plan for the
transition to cgroup v2. This transition involves:

1. **Upgrading Systems**: Ensuring that the underlying operating systems and
container runtimes support cgroup v2.
2. **Testing Workloads**: Verifying that workloads and applications function
correctly with cgroup v2.

## Further reading

> 

Reviewer: We could also link to https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/cgroups.7.html

Author: Updated, thanks.

> - [Cgroup v2 in
> Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/)

Reviewer 5: We use site-relative links where feasible. Additionally, it would be helpful if markdown links were kept on a single line.
```suggestion
- [Cgroup v2 in Kubernetes](/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/)
```

Reviewer 3: Can we add the 1.25 cgroup v2 GA blog to further reading as well? 
 - https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/08/31/cgroupv2-ga-1-25/
```
- [Kubernetes 1.25: cgroup v2 graduates to GA](/blog/2022/08/31/cgroupv2-ga-1-25/)
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.31: Moving cgroup v1 Support into Maintenance Mode"
date: 2024-08-14

> slug: kubernetes-1-31-moving-cgroup-v1-support-maintenance-mode

Reviewer: For SEO, how about:
```suggestion
slug: cgroup-v1-support-to-maintenance-mode
```

Author: Looking at other blogs I think we need to have the version mentioned somewhere.

Reviewer: Nope; no need.

improved functionality, scalability, and a more consistent interface. But before
we dive into the consequences for Kubernetes, let's take a step back and
understand what cgroups and their significance in Linux and Kubernetes are.

## Understanding cgroups

[Control groups](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/cgroups.7.html), or
cgroups, are a Linux kernel feature that allows the allocation, prioritization,
denial, and management of system resources (such as CPU, memory, disk I/O,
and network bandwidth) among processes. This functionality is crucial for
maintaining system performance and ensuring that no single process can
monopolize system resources, which is especially important in multi-tenant
environments.

There are two versions of cgroups:
[v1](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/index.html) and
[v2](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html). While cgroup v1
provided sufficient capabilities for resource management, it had limitations
that led to the development of cgroup v2. Cgroup v2 offers a more unified
and consistent interface and better resource control features.

## Cgroups in Kubernetes

> As a leading container orchestration platform, kubernetes relies heavily

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Kubernetes relies heavily
```

Seems like we are tooting our own horn too much. And not really sure if this is necessary to say here.

Author: updated, thanks

resources consumed by containers running in pods. Each container in Kubernetes
is placed in its own cgroup, which allows Kubernetes to enforce resource limits,
monitor usage, and ensure fair resource distribution among all containers.

### How Kubernetes uses cgroups

**Resource Allocation**
: Ensures that containers do not exceed their allocated CPU and memory limits.

**Isolation**
: Isolates containers from each other to prevent resource contention.

**Monitoring**
: Tracks resource usage for each container to provide insights and metrics.

## Transitioning to Cgroup v2

The Linux community has been focusing on cgroup v2 for new features and
improvements. Major Linux distributions and projects like
[systemd](https://github.com/systemd/systemd/issues/30852) are

> transitioning towards cgroup v2, which provides several benefits over cgroup

Author: Updated, thanks.

---
layout: blog

> title: "Moving cgroup v1 Support into Maintenance Mode in Kubernetes 1.31"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes 1.31: Moving cgroup v1 Support into Maintenance Mode in Kubernetes 1.31"
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

date: 2024-08-15

> slug: moving-cgroup-v1-support-maintenance-mode-kubernetes-1-31

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
slug: kubernetes-1-31-moving-cgroup-v1-support-maintenance-mode
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

author: Harshal Patil
---

> As Kubernetes continues to evolve and adapt to the changing landscape of

Reviewer 6: To be honest, we are transition to cgroup v2 due to the linux community evolving/adapting. 

Maybe we can say "As container orchestration evolves and adapts, the Kubernetes community has decided to move cgroup v1 support into maintance mode".

container orchestration, the community has decided to move cgroup v1 support

> into maintenance mode in v1.31. This shift aligns with the broader industry's

Reviewer 6: Reading this, I think "what is maintenance mode"? Maybe we can link to the markdown as we define it later on in the document.

Author: Updated, thanks.

move towards cgroup v2, offering improved functionality, scalability, and

> a more consistent interface. But before we delve into what this means for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a more consistent interface. But before we delve into the consequences for
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

> Kubernetes, let's take a step back and understand what cgroups are and their
> significance in Linux and Kubernetes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Kubernetes, let's take a step back and understand what cgroups and their
significance in Linux and Kubernetes are.
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

## Understanding cgroups

[Control groups](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/cgroups.7.html), or
cgroups, are a Linux kernel feature that allows the allocation, prioritization,
denial, and management of system resources (such as CPU, memory, disk I/O,
and network bandwidth) among processes. This functionality is crucial for
maintaining system performance and ensuring that no single process can
monopolize system resources, which is especially important in multi-tenant
environments.

There are two versions of cgroups:
[v1](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/index.html) and
[v2](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html). While cgroup v1
provided sufficient capabilities for resource management, it had limitations
that led to the development of cgroup v2. Cgroup v2 offers a more unified

> and consistent interface and better resource control features.

Author: If we can easily link to external site, it would be super awesome otherwise IMO those points may take more space than it deserves.

> ## Cgroups in Kubernetes Kubernetes, a leading container orchestration

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## Cgroups in Kubernetes, a leading container orchestration
```

Reviewer 6: I think you might actually mean:

## Cgroups in Kubernetes

Kubernetes, a leading container orchestration platform

Author: Updated, thanks.

platform, relies heavily on cgroups to manage and isolate the resources
consumed by containers running in pods. Each container in Kubernetes is
placed in its own cgroup, which allows Kubernetes to enforce resource limits,
monitor usage, and ensure fair resource distribution among all containers.

### How Kubernetes Uses cgroups:

> * **Resource Allocation**: Ensures that containers do not exceed their
> allocated CPU and memory limits.
> * **Isolation**: Isolates containers from each other to prevent resource
> contention.
> * **Monitoring**: Tracks resource usage for each container to provide
> insights and metrics.

Reviewer 4: nit: you can also use a description list for this 

```suggestion
**Resource Allocation**
: Ensures that containers do not exceed their allocated CPU and memory limits.

**Isolation**
: Isolates containers from each other to prevent resource contention.

**Monitoring**
: Tracks resource usage for each container to provide insights and metrics.
```

Author: Update, thanks.

## Transitioning to Cgroup v2

The Linux community has been focusing on cgroup v2 for new features and
improvements. Major Linux distributions and projects like systemd are
transitioning towards cgroup v2, which provides several benefits over cgroup
v1, such as Unified Hierarchy, Improved Interface, Better Resource Control etc.

Given these advantages, Kubernetes is also making the move to embrace cgroup
v2 more fully. However, this transition needs to be handled carefully to avoid
disrupting existing workloads and to provide a smooth migration path for users.

> 

Author: Updated, thanks.

1. **Feature Freeze**: No new features will be added to cgroup v1 support.
2. **Security Fixes**: Critical security fixes will still be provided.
3. **Best-Effort Bug Fixes**: Major bugs may be fixed if feasible, but some
issues might remain unresolved.

### Why Move to Maintenance Mode?

The move to maintenance mode is driven by the need to stay in line with the
broader ecosystem and to encourage the adoption of cgroup v2, which offers
better performance, security, and usability. By transitioning cgroup v1 to
maintenance mode, Kubernetes can focus on enhancing support for cgroup v2
and ensure it meets the needs of modern workloads. It's important to note
that maintenance mode does not mean deprecation; cgroup v1 will continue to
receive critical security fixes and major bug fixes as needed.

## Impact on Users

Users currently relying on cgroup v1 are highly encouraged to plan for the
transition to cgroup v2. This transition involves:

1. **Upgrading Systems**: Ensuring that the underlying operating systems and
container runtimes support cgroup v2.
2. **Testing Workloads**: Verifying that workloads and applications function

> correctly with cgroup v2.

Author: How to migrate depends on os (e.g. CoreOS has a different procedure than ubuntu). That's the reason I intentionally left it out.

> correctly with cgroup v2.

Reviewer 2: This comment can be considered as resolved!
